Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley. I'm Tom Turbiville.
Rich Thomas of College Station will talk about the destroyer USS Leonard F. Mason as if it's a family member.
And why not?
It was his home for four years during his service as a Navy sailor during the Korean War.
He found the fast track to combat for sure.
Just three months after joining the Navy at age 17, the USS Mason was on the receiving end of a Korean offensive off the eastern shore of the country at Wonton Harbor.
It was a quick introduction to war.
He knows that he was luckier than many others to have survived the conflict.
We are glad that he did, and we are proud to welcome Rich Thomas to Veterans of the Valley.
Rich, it is indeed a pleasure to have you here, and thank you again for your service.
Let's go back to what we were just talking about.
It was 1951 that you signed up in the Navy and won too long, a little bit of training, and you were off the shore in Korea, and you had fire coming at you.
Sort of look back that many years ago, and what were you thinking back then?
I was thinking the quickest way of getting out of the line of fire.
At the time, the Navy rushed a bunch of young men onto these ships to fill out a wartime crew, and I happened to be one of them.
And when I went into Wonson Harbor, I'd been aboard ship three days, and I went into Wonson Harbor, and they opened up on us.
And I didn't even have a battle station.
And I was scared to death, and I saw all these men running for this little hatch going up to their battle stations.
And I waited until they all got up, and I followed
through that little hole and the chief asked me where my battle station was and I said, I don't have one, sir.
And he said, follow me.
And he shoved me into this little round room underneath the turret and said, get against the wall and stay out of the way.
And that's my first experience with the enemy.
So when the shelling started, you were in your rack down below, right?
Yes, I was in my rack, and I studied these guys for a while going up this ladder, and they were running full bore, and I thought, well, this is not for me down here by myself, so I went up that hole with them.
When the Korean War broke out, I know that a lot of the armed services were depleted at the time because after World War II, a lot of the services had really cut back.
So that's sort of the way the Korean War started, having to rebuild troop and troop enforcement.
Talk a little bit about what the job of the mason was.
You were off the shore of Korea, the eastern shore of Korea, and it was near a Korean railway station, and part of your job was to knock that out, right?
Yes.
Shore bombarding.
And Wonsan Harbor happened to be just a hot spot because it was the biggest railroad depot in Korea.
And we had to stay in the harbor 24 hours a day.
and firing 24 hours a day.
Around the clock we kept firing.
And we had all kinds of stations up the coast of Korea.
And these were generally small railroad stations going up through there.
And we were in charge of knocking them out.
And we did a pretty good job of it.
The mason was a tough little tin can.
I read on the internet about the Mason, said on May the 16th, 1951, what they called the Siege of Wonsan Harbor and the ship received a Korean service medal for what happened that particular day.
I guess you were on the boat that time and sort of talk about that.
Was that what we were talking about three months after you got there or was that later on?
Well, we were in there quite a
quite a number of times, but that particular time was the three months after I was in.
We just got into the harbor and they opened up on us.
They put some shrapnel on the side of us and they just weren't quite the shot that we were.
We would fire at them and they would run back into these caves.
They would come out for a while and fire 15, 20 rounds and then go back in.
It was kind of hard to get to them.
We had short notice to where it was coming from.
Once you finally got a battle station, I know your first job you told me about was one that you had to try to sleep around powder kegs, sleep on powder kegs.
Talk about that.
That wasn't the greatest job on the ship.
No, it was kind of funny too, but it wasn't funny.
They told me I was assigned to the powder room.
I said where's the powder room and they said it's down in the bottom of the ship and so they said get you a life jacket and go down there and I went down there and there was two guys stand watching at the same time and this other guy was laying up on a powder keg sleeping and without his life jacket he was using it as a pillow and I said his name was Summer Don I said Don you know you should get your life jacket on he said Richard
It's not going to do you a bit of good if they hit this powder room.
It won't mean no life jackets.
It won't mean that's nothing left.
No.
But you were on four-hour shifts, so somehow you had to find out a way to get some sleep while sleeping on these powder cakes, right?
Yeah, we did.
We did sleep.
Eat or sleep or read books.
There wasn't anything to do.
Well, there was, too, when we were firing 24 hours a day.
You had to slap one in there every night.
The powder, you have a powder keg like this and they throw that in the turret and then they put the shell in the front of it.
There's two pieces to this when you fire a shell.
And they got an elevator going up.
That was my job, throwing these powder kegs in that elevator.
Eventually you got to change jobs.
You got to go to the main director, which you felt was a safer place because of the armament there, I know.
But you were a fire control technician for three years, your last three years on the Mason.
Talk about that job and what that involved.
Well, it controlled.
It's just exactly what it says, the fire control technician.
you can lock on all the guns to a target.
Like say we were in the harbors, and they opened fire, we could see the flash of their guns, and that's how we would jeep row in.
And on the main director, I was a pointer, and we would try to get onto the target.
As soon as we got on it, we hit a button, and all the guns locked onto that particular target, and we could open fire with every gun on the ship.
And that's basically what a fire control technician did.
What kind of armament was on the mason?
What kind of guns were there?
Tin.
That's why they call them tin cans.
There's not much armor.
The only place that they had a lot of armor was the main director.
And I started thinking a little bit, and I said, where is the safest place on this ship?
And they said, I think the main director, because it's got about a foot of armor.
So I finagled my way up to the top and got up there and directed it.
But there wasn't too many safe spots on a destroyer because they're not real strongly built.
But it was a destroyer, and as a destroyer, its main job was to take out other targets.
So there were a lot of guns on this ship, weren't there?
There were three twin fives, which is 105 millimeter, I believe, and there were two twin threes and two single threes, four torpedo mounts, or tubes, and we had depth charges on both sides of the ship that could sling the depth charges out to the sides.
There was two racks on the back where we could roll them off the back.
And we had what they call little missiles up on the hedgehogs.
They had two hedgehog racks.
They had 15 hedgehogs on each rack, on each side.
And they were probably the best
anti-submarine gun we had.
We could pick up a submarine and we knew exactly where it was and we could lock on and fire and those 15 rockets would go out there and spread out and we had them set right where the submarine was.
We could set them the depth of it and those things would go down and explode and it was a goodbye submarine.
The destroyers, submarines don't like destroyers.
I'll bet not.
They don't like them at all.
Now, the fleet that you were a part of in the Wonsan Harbor, it was a large fleet.
I think you said it was, the fleet was number 77, is that right?
Task Force 77.
Talk about
about how many carriers, how many battleships, about what was the makeup of the task force?
Most of the time, Tom, there would be two to three carriers.
Just an example, we had the Boxer, the Field C, they were not big carriers.
like they have today, but they were the biggest we had.
Most of the time we had a battleship, the Missouri, Jersey, the Iowa, and we'd have two cruisers and probably three squadrons of destroyers.
You always had to have those destroyers to protect the carriers.
It's pretty hard to get through 12 destroyers.
You mentioned the Missouri, so this was the same ship that obviously gained fame as
the surrender of Japan being signed on that deck at the end of World War II.
It obviously kept in service and kept in service in Korea.
So that's the ship you're talking about.
It was at times part of your fleet.
Indeed.
I noticed that the Mason also had some nicknames.
Leakey Leonard, Racin Mason, or a couple of the things that you called it, right?
Yeah.
Probably the reason they called it the Racin Mason is because I think there was about four or five destroyers that
They were racing to pick up the astronauts when they dumped them from the Pacific.
Put a mason out around them and he got there first.
This is a good time to talk about that, although it happened after you had already left the service.
In 1966, this same ship, the same destroyer, the USS Mason, was involved in a rescue of astronaut Neil Armstrong and David Scott from Gemini 8.
I was able to learn that after they had an emergency.
at the end of their space flight and had to end it early and go into the ocean quickly.
And it was the Mason was the first one that came along and picked up the capsule.
So it gained some fame there.
And as a matter of fact, later on, we've got a photograph of that capsule coming up on the USS Mason.
I noticed, I don't want to go further without telling people who Leonard F. Mason was.
I read that he was a PFC who died in Guam during World War II, and he was a
a young soldier who gave his life in World War II, and that's who the destroyer was named after.
He was named after.
See, destroyers, Tom, are named after Medal of Honor winners.
Right.
Most of them.
And Leonard, his family located the captain that was in the foxhole with him the day he received his heroism.
He was under orders not to get out of the foxhole, and he had his left arm just about blown off.
And I think his leg and his stomach and the stock of his gun was blown off.
And the captain gave him orders to stay in the foxhole and he said, no, we're losing too many men.
And he charged the Japanese foxhole and wiped them out single-handedly.
What a brave servant of his country.
He kind of, too.
He's from my home state of Kentucky.
I was kind of proud of that.
I bet you were.
Speaking of, let's go back.
Let's backtrack to Rich Thomas' life.
You grew up in Uniontown, Kentucky, and quite a large family.
You had 11 siblings.
There were 12 kids in all, and I think you said you were the youngest of the sons, right?
Right.
Yeah, and I'm most proud that we were all veterans.
There was three in World War II and three in Korea.
That's okay.
We'll just turn that off.
I always do that.
That's fine.
Don't worry about it.
Keep going.
And my oldest brother, he went on Omaha Beach and he went all the way across Germington and up to the Battle of the Bulge with General Patton's tanks.
And my second oldest brother, he had the USS Princeton shot up under him.
And he was able to get off, but there was a little story.
If we've got time, I'll tell you.
Sure, go ahead.
He was running across the flight deck and it was burning and smoking.
He said he couldn't see where he was going.
And he was going to jump in the water because they were going down.
And the kid behind him yelled, he couldn't swim.
And so...
I get tears in my eyes when I talk about it.
My brother took his life jacket off and gave it to him.
Jumped in the water by himself.
You certainly should be proud.
I know you told me a story just the other day about how it's always a snapshot in your mind of when your brother came home.
But you're proud of all your siblings, your brothers and your sisters, and all of them were veterans, three of them in World War II and three, like yourself, that served in Korea.
And, of course, your brother and all of your siblings except the brother that you mentioned.
What was his name?
I'm sorry.
The one that was on the Princeton, Leonard.
Leonard.
All of your siblings except for Leonard are still alive and he died in an accident so a lot of longevity in the Thomas family.
Your parents were farmers in Kentucky and you celebrated your 18th birthday I know before just getting to Korea, had about nine weeks of basic training and then you were there.
You were a young guy really sort of learning about life quite early, weren't you?
I sure was.
It made a man I'm quicker than I wanted to be, I think.
Indeed.
We've got some pictures, some pictures that you gave to me, some pictures that I was able to get off the amazing Internet when I went and learned more about the USS Leonard F. Mason.
We can go to some of those pictures now.
We'll take a look at them.
Matter of fact, you can look right there on the monitor, and that is a picture of the mason.
Talk a little bit about the ship and sort of what we're looking at.
Well, it was 300 and some feet long and had a crew of 325 men.
And you can see the two twin fives in front and the hedgehogs right behind it.
And then there was another twin five in the back.
And there's twin threes up at a bridge.
And you can see that little house right below the mast there.
That was my battle station.
That was the main director.
That's where I spent a lot of time.
We stood four on eight off around a clock for four years.
852 was the number on the hall.
Right there.
That's quite a ship, no doubt about it.
Now this is a picture that I found on the internet, just an amazing picture.
And if people will look closely, that was obviously taken from another ship in your fleet, I guess.
And this was taken in May of 1951.
So you are on the Mason time this picture was taken.
As you can see, the rough seas of the Wonsan Harbor there in the background is the shore, the eastern shore of the country of Korea.
And if you look very closely right there in the middle of the picture, that's the USS Leonard F. Mason.
As you look at that picture, sort of what are we looking at?
We get an idea of how close you were to the shore and how close the shore was to you also.
So that could have been some quite fierce battles there, right?
Yeah, we went in very close.
And that little hill there is where most of the artillery came from.
And that was a dangerous spot right there.
I had one quick story I was going to tell you.
We got a call one day.
We were under fire and we got a call for some help.
And the ship that was out of sight, one of the big cruisers, it was my brother's ship.
He was on at the same time.
And so he kind of got us out of a bind that day.
You were able to find him again.
My brother Pat, yes.
Right, your brother Pat, one of the veterans.
Okay, let's move on.
I believe we've got... Now, this is the picture we promised you.
This was so long after, of course, your service, but I wanted to include this.
We just told the story about in 1966, Gemini 8, the capsule, had an emergency landing after a problem that they had in space.
and Neil Armstrong, who eventually, of course, would be the first man to step on the moon, and astronaut Scott were in the capsule, and the first ship to come alongside was the Mason, where you had served for four years.
And this is a picture of the capsule actually being lifted up onto the deck of the Mason.
So that's one of the claims to fame of the Masons.
Yeah, there's a story there two times.
Leonard F. Mason's mother and Neil Armstrong's mother were friends.
Wow.
They lived a few blocks apart before this even came about.
Incredible.
Okay, let's move on.
I think we've got the final picture.
There's a handsome...
Young sailor.
How old do you think you were?
You think you were about 18 or 19 when that picture was taken?
I was 18, I believe.
18 years old.
When that picture was taken, yeah.
So you were already on the Mason by then?
Yeah, I'd been across, I'd been over to Korea, and we were kind of in the middle of a transfer back to the States.
So I was on there two months, and then we came back to the States, and that's when I took that picture.
Right.
Yeah.
Well, thank you for those pictures and thanks to the internet because the internet is amazing.
I was able to come up with those pictures and learn so much more about the Leonard F. Mason.
You told a story about how there was some discomfort in eating sometimes on the Mason because you'd get in the chow line and the Koreans were able to get a pretty good look at you there, right?
Yeah, we kind of figured it out.
I think we started getting the chow line down below deck.
But every day at noon, it seemed like we were pretty hungry guys.
We didn't get a chance to eat because they'd open up on us.
And we were so close in that they could see us.
And the captain figured that out.
He said, you guys are going to have to see.
getting the shot line downstairs.
Somebody's going to get hurt.
Indeed.
The Mason itself was a fairly fortunate ship.
It took some shrapnel.
It took some hits.
Nothing real serious or no casualties, at least while you were there.
But all the ships in the fleet certainly weren't that lucky.
Your ship was luckier than most, right?
We had one to relieve us one time.
We were up pretty close to the Russian border.
And we had already knocked out a train that day.
And it was our time to go in for a little hour and hour, so another ship took our place.
And a couple days later, we were going to Wansan, I mean, Sasibo, Japan, for a little hour and hour, and we got an emergency call back down, Mason.
Got an emergency, and it was a ship that took our place, and they had 13 deaths, and both stacks blown off, and they were pretty well shot up.
That was a ship that took our place, so.
We were pretty lucky again.
Indeed.
Your job wasn't just to fire upon the railroad tracks and to take those out.
I know that you also provided cover for air cover, I believe, and carrier cover, and you also had that job too.
Yeah, shore bombarding and patrolling the Formosa Straits.
And the plane guard, we did a lot of plane guard work behind the carriers.
And, oh gosh.
I know you'd pick up pilots out of the water, some who were disabled, some who had lost their lives.
You picked up those other airmen and sailors and Navy pilots and all that that had been shot down.
So it was sort of a multi-task ship, the Mason, right?
Yes, it was.
I can't think of what all we had to do.
A lot of times we would stay offshore when these Navy planes were bombing.
If they got hit, they knew that we would be out there and they could sit down right next to us.
And we picked up three young men like that.
But the main story I could tell you is I was watching three planes coming in one day with my binoculars and one of them was smoking.
And it looked like something's wrong.
And all of a sudden,
He turned and came right toward us.
Of course, it scared me to death.
I yelled at the officer today that we were being attacked.
I scared him too.
The kid stuck with that plane until he almost hit the water and then he bailed out.
His chute didn't open.
He lost his life.
Wow.
That has to be something that you certainly remember.
Oh, yeah.
I'm going to lighten it up because I'm going to get you to retell a story that you told me about one day when you all had gone to the Midway to refuel.
You need to tell me about your high diving act.
Go ahead.
The stage is yours.
Tell us.
Doc Cooper will love this.
We had been over with the Marine Corps.
We'd go on to refuel on the way over in Midway Island, and we'd go and reminisce with the Marine Corps.
They had a bunch of Marines on there.
And we'd go over and drink a little iced tea and coke with them.
And just one day, I think me and a couple of friends of mine got a little too much coke.
And when I got back to the ship, I went up on the bridge and we were up looking around.
And I decided to do a famous swan dive.
And I used to pull on the banks of the Ohio River in Kentucky.
And they dared me to do it, and over I went.
And why I'm here today, I don't know, Tom.
I didn't think I would ever hit the water, but I did.
It was a beautiful dive.
It was a beautiful dive?
I saluted the officer today when I went by the quarterdeck, so he wasn't too happy about that.
You just had a little too much lemonade, and you were just celebrating, right?
It was all the Marines' fault.
They got us in trouble.
Last January, you and your wife Marguerite celebrated your 50th wedding anniversary, and you have two sons, Bill and Mike.
Why don't you talk about Marguerite and how you met Marguerite and about that poor soul Jack Hayes.
We don't know exactly where Jack is now, but all we know is that he's probably still mad at you.
Talk about how you met Marguerite.
Well, I was on the foc's little ship when they were tied up in Long Beach, California.
And I was up there sunning and I looked down the pier and here comes this friend of mine that was a shipmate walking down the pier with this beautiful blonde.
My gosh, where did that guy find her?
And he brought her up on the photo where I was up there sunning, and he made the mistake of going down and getting a cup of coffee, and he told me to talk to her while he was down there.
So I did some fast talking, and that was 50-some years ago, and I'm still talking fast.
But she's been a wonderful, couldn't ask for a better woman, and God bless Leonard Alpha Mason because they introduced us.
Absolutely.
And she spent her career, her working career, working for the Social Security Administration, I believe you told me.
30 years, is that right?
She had 38 years with the government.
She worked with the Navy Department for a while in Long Beach.
and the VA and then she went to Social Security and spent a lot of time there.
I got to keep her busy, Tom.
I had to eat.
I'm very proud of your service.
You got out of the Navy.
You were in Chicago, I believe, and you were in Chicago.
You were in the printing business for a while, but then talk about what happened after that.
You changed careers and that's what brought you to Texas.
Yeah, this friend of mine had an uncle that bought a big estate, and they needed some boys to take care of the estate, and I was tired of the printing business, and he knew that I was kind of a farmer, and I guess he thought I could plant flowers and stuff, and he talked me into going with him, and he was a grain broker at the Board of Trade,
And he, shortly after I went out there to take care of his estate, he decided to sell it and buy an oil company in Texas.
And he asked me if I wanted to come to Texas and help him run his oil company.
So it was called Casco Oil out in Iola, Texas.
And so that's how I got down here.
He brought me down here with the oil business.
And you've been here some 30 years now.
Yeah, we love College Station.
Brian put it up with the Aggies and all that.
And I know that you're a member of the VFW.
You're an honor guard, part of the honor guard with Post 4692, and I know that you're very proud of that and proud of all your service.
I wish we had more time to talk more, but thank you very much for being with us, Rich Thomas, and thank you for your service.
Tom, thank you for having me.
All right, we appreciate it.
So now you understand why Rich Thomas considers the Leonard F. Mason like one of the family.
Each year, some 100 gather those who sailed on the Mason between when it was launched in January of 1946 and when it was struck in 1976.
The USS Mason was eventually sold to Taiwan.
It was decommissioned in 2000.
And its fate?
Well, it was sunk to create an artificial reef.
So it's gone.
But the memories of the proud destroyer will never die.
Certainly not for Rich Thomas.
We thank him for his service, as we thank all veterans.
And we thank our underwriter, First National Bank.
For more stories about veterans of the Brazos Valley, read Brazos Valley Heroes each Sunday in the Eagle.
For Rich Thomas, I'm Tom Turberville.
We'll see you next time on Veterans of the Valley.
you you